---
title: "Aloha world!"
date: 2022-06-01
lastmod: 2023-08-06
tags: []
categories: [Miscellaneous]
draft: false
---

![anime girl holding book](anime-girl-holding-book.webp)

# Why this blog?

Hello, I'm Wesley¹ and this is the first post of my blog, for years — since I
was a kid — I enjoy writing down my thoughts and ideas, in my childhood time
would create prototypes on Blogger and share content about Minecraft or computer
tricks that I've had found over the web. The last website I built was
[wesleyjrz.github.io](https://www.wesleyjrz.github.io), which is a very simple
website I made when learning HTML5, CSS3 and some JavaScript in my first steps
on programming, at that time most of my JS code was taken from Stack Overflow
and I didn't even understand every aspect of it, but I've always learned through
challenges this way, trying things that I've never used before, don't expect too
much for this old website, it was just my first learning experiece where I just
wanted to create something with my bare hands for the first time, and that's
what I did.

Nevertheless, now I want to have a place to share my thoughts, discoveries and
new knowledge, without caring about building it from scratch, I want just
usability and simplicity, and that's why I built this personal blog using an
amazing tool called [Hugo](https://gohugo.io), which is an incredible fast
framework written in [Go](https://go.dev) to create static websites, and it
perfect fits my needs, the theme I'm using is
[Notepadium](https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/hugo-notepadium) which I've chosen
because it doesn't use any JavaScript, providing a fast, secure and clean
experience for everyone and keeping things as simple as possible. It's possible
to access my website in every Web Browser out there without any struggles, even
those terminal-based ones like w3m and lynx. I may add some custom JS in the
future if it becomes really necessary, but I don't pretend to.

<!-- link "about section" -->
*Postea*² I'm going to write more about myself in the **About** section for
those who are interested, for now you can take a look on this brief overview of
my personal tastes and projects in my [GitHub
Profile.](https://www.github.com/wesleyjrz) Also check the source of this
website anytime at
[wesleyjrz/wesleyjrz.com](https://www.github.com/wesleyjrz/wesleyjrz.com).

# The blog's name

The name of the website is a reference to the name of the C++ programming
language, which has this name because it is like C but with a bunch of new
features added to it. This blog is like my first personal website, but with a
lot more added to it, because it isn't only about me, but it's a repository of
knowledge that I acquire being published, it's like my mind being turned into an
open-source project.

# Why Aloha world instead of Hello world?

The name of this post is **Aloha world** because *Aloha* is a Hawaiian greeting
that means either “Hello” or “Goodbye”, and it's the word for love as well, in
programming we always starting learning a new language by writing a code that
prints out the “Hello world!” phrase to the screen, so why not write “Aloha
world!” as well?

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
  puts("Aloha world!");
  return 0;
}
```

That's it, it was just a short presentation of my new blog for you guys, there's
more coming soon, ***aloha!***

### Notes and references³

1. Pronounced as: /ˈwɛzli/
2. Later
3. All publications with top-numbered words or phrases will have a section like this with notes and/or references
